Now that you are familiar with the theory and some of the practical aspects of applying generalized
eigendecomposition to LM data, I thought you would enjoy an opportunity to continue practicing how
this technique works, and also including some more analyses, including testing for overfitting by
evaluating the data in a test set that is separate from the training set, and you're also going to
run the analyses in multiple LMS to check for general reproducibility.
There's lots of great stuff going on here in this code challenge.
So let's begin with exercise one.
Here you will use the same him.her data set that we've been using several times so far.
But the idea of this code challenge is that we are going to train the eigenvectors using that data set.
And then we will test for generalization performance using a completely separate data set.
And also one that comes from real data.
So in particular import the first 2000 documents from the fine web dataset.
We've used this data set several times already.
Although it was earlier in the course.
For example in the pre-training and fine tuning sections if you like you can find that code file and
copy paste.
But I've also included most of this code into the helper file.
Anyway, what you want to do is find 50 him and 50 her target words in the fine web dataset and extract
those words plus their surrounding context to put into a PyTorch tensor as a batch that you can input
into the model.
So that data set is going to be of size 100 by ten, corresponding to 50 samples of each pronoun.
So 50 hymns and 50 hers and ten tokens in each sentence sequence where the sixths token is the target
word.
And then you can print out a few of the examples, like what I showed here.
So I just picked these four at random.
So here you see him him and her and her.
Again, the idea is that we are going to run the GED on the Him.her data set to create the eigenvectors,
and then we see if those vectors can also separate him from her in this fine web data set that the eigendecomposition
is not exposed to.
Now, you don't need to worry about any analyses yet.
For now, exercise one just focus on creating the two data sets, and I forgot to mention this explicitly,
but I hope it's obvious that you want to give these two data sets different names, like you can call
them train and test.
Anyway, now you should pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code and show my solution.
Here are the libraries that we will need for exercise one, and also some other libraries that we do
not need now, but we will end up using later on for later exercises.
Okay, so import those here.
I'm importing the model.
Here are the sentences.
The him.her sentences.
You.
Now I'm sure you're completely bored of these sentences.
I'll try not to use them too much in the next section of the course.
Okay, so there's those.
And there's the target words here.
I'm importing the fine web data set.
Again.
You have seen this code before.
I'm just arbitrarily importing the first 2000 documents.
That's more than enough.
That's going to be a lot, actually.
Uh, and, uh, yeah.
So then, uh, because we only need 50, uh, target words there.
Okay.
So let's see.
So then what I'm doing here is finding all of the tokens in the fine web data set, or at least the
first part of it, uh, where the token equals him and the token equals her.
And I call those the him tokens and the tokens.
And then here I'm printing out a couple of them just to show some examples.
Now, this is not is not yet the batch.
We haven't yet created the data that we will use to input into the model.
This is just to give you some sense of what some of these tokens look like in context.
And that's what you see here.
So here we have a him him him uh, him.
Yeah.
I'm only actually showing the hymns.
You could also show some of the hers as well.
That's fine.
Okay.
So now here I'm creating the batches.
Now, what I have decided to do here Year is, uh, take the her tokens from much later in the, uh,
in the sequence in the data set.
So I'm adding, uh, an offset here of half of the tokens.
That's really just to push them into later in the data set.
Uh, that's not critical.
I didn't mention it when I gave the instructions for this exercise.
The reason why I'm doing it here is to just avoid the risk of using the same sentence so that the model
is processing mostly the same tokens.
For example, we can look at this one here, nominate him or her.
So if I would take this sentence or this token plus its surrounding context for both him and her, then
that means that there's a lot of overlap in exactly identical tokens that the model will be processing,
and it's not really necessary to avoid that, but I thought it would be nice to avoid that.
So that's why I added this offset here.
Otherwise you can see I'm looping over 50 and I say batch I.
So this looping index variable I that comes from the hymn tokens with some surrounding context.
And then 50 plus I for the her tokens.
So that means that in this batch let me show you that in this batch the first 50 are for him and the
second 50 block of 50 are for her.
Okay.
And then yeah, here I'm just printing out a couple of examples as I showed in the slides him him her
her exercise two is not so difficult and shouldn't take you too long to implement.
Here.
You want to import GPT two small and implant hooks to get all the activations of the MLP expansion neurons
before the non-linearity.
Then you can forward pass both data sets to get the activations, and you can print out the sizes of
the data matrices.
Now for the train and test sets, the sizes will be slightly different because the number of sequences
and the sequence lengths are different, although of course they are exactly the same neurons with exactly
the same indices.
That is important because, as you already know, we are going to train the eigenvectors from the train
set and then apply them to this test set.
So that is your mission.
You know what to do.
And I also know what to do.
So here is the code for exercise two.
I already imported the model earlier before I even got to the code for exercise one, but that's fine.
Okay so here typical code that you've seen before.
I'm looping over all of the layers.
And as you've seen multiple times before, I'm not only getting the output, I'm also detaching it from
the PyTorch from the model computational graph and transforming it into numpy format.
Now this part here is sometimes necessary, sometimes not, depending on what subsequent analyses you
are going to do.
For us, in this case, it's just more convenient to have all of the data in numpy format.
So uh, so that's why I have this here.
Okay.
So let me run that code here.
And now I'm pushing the train tokens and the test tokens through the model.
And here I am assigning them to different variables with different variable names.
So we have the train activations and the test activations.
So here is a question for you.
Notice that these two lines of code are not identical.
Obviously the variable names differ, but on the right hand side they are not identical.
Here I have a copy method on this dictionary and here I don't.
So my question for you is whether this is necessary for this line and why I do not have dot copy also
for this line.
So that's something for you to ponder.
Basically just has to do with how Python deals with these kinds of assassinations with, you know,
assigning one variable to another without changing it at all.
Okay.
So let's see run through this.
If you wanted to put this on the GPU, that's fine.
That will save you some tens of seconds I guess, but it's not that much.
Data took seven seconds overall, so if you put it on the GPU, it probably would have saved you six
seconds of analysis time here, although it was probably more than six seconds to write all the code
and select a GPU and so on.
Okay.
And here I'm just printing out the sizes of those matrices.
So the train data, there's 54 sentences per pronoun and the test there's 50.
And then here we have eight tokens in the sequence and ten tokens in the sequence.
And why did I not choose to balance them.
Because it doesn't really matter.
And also, uh, okay.
Actually, there was a reason, uh, it is uh, sometimes tricky to remember which data set you're working
with.
So for confirmation, for sanity checking as you're developing code and going through, uh, analyses
and working with code, it's often handy to have different data matrices with slightly different sizes
so that the chance of you accidentally using this one when you went to use this one is lower, because
you can check the sizes and you will see.
You can confirm which analysis this corresponds to.
Now for exercise Size three.
The goal of exercise three is simply to create a function that uses PCA to dimension reduce the activations
data.
The idea of this function is that for each layer in the model, you will call this function, and that
will extract all of the target activations on the training set.
Run a PCA calculate how many components it takes to account for 99% of the total variability in the
data, and then output the activations, the eigenvectors, and the number of components to keep.
Now all of this is based purely on the training data.
You're not using any of the test data anywhere in this function.
And that means that you need this loop over sentences, because in the training data, the target tokens
can appear in any number of different positions.
Now here in this case, I want you to use scikit learn's PCA function, because it turns out that that's
a lot faster than writing out the code yourself, which is the code that I used in the previous video.
So you might need to do a little bit of extra work to figure out how to extract the eigenvalues, and
then convert that into cumulative variance explained.
On the other hand, this line here I have left intact from the solutions file because I find it like
pointlessly confusing.
So basically scikit learn names the eigenvectors component matrix components underscore.
That part is fine, but it puts the eigenvectors in the rows instead of in the columns.
Now I find that extremely annoying and confusing because it's different from how, like the rest of
the world stores eigenvectors in columns.
This is the sort of thing that causes confusion and errors.
But anyway, the solution is simply to transpose the components matrix, and that gives you the eigenvectors
matrix with the eigenvectors in the columns, as we have done in the previous video.
Here you do want to export from this function.
You do want to return the principal components eigenvectors, because later on in a later exercise you
will apply those eigenvectors to dimension reduce the test set.
Anyway, fleshing out this function is the entirety of exercise three.
If you are struggling with this exercise, then of course you can copy and paste a lot of code from
the previous video.
So pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code.
So here I'm defining the function.
I call it dim red for dimension reduction via principal components analysis.
Input the layer number because I'm going to call this function inside a for loop over all the different
layers of the model.
Here is where I'm getting the target activations.
You've seen all code like this before.
So here I'm getting the index of the target, either him or her.
And then I'm just grabbing that activation and storing that in this matrix here.
So this is going to be a 108 by 3072 matrix corresponding to 108 sentences or sequences.
So targets and 3072 activations from each of the MLP expansion neurons.
So that's the activation.
Here we do the principal components analysis to dimension compress the data.
Now this code is commented out.
This code is all correct, but this does the I, the Eigendecomposition and the principal components
analysis manually using code that I showed in the previous video.
I included this here because it is equivalent to this code here.
The thing is that this is pretty slow and this is pretty fast.
So when you're only doing this once for one layer, then this is fine.
You can do this method, but you will see when we run this over 12 layers.
And then later on we're going to reproduce this in uh, in GPT two XL which has several dozen layers.
This is going to end up just being ludicrously slow.
And this is quite fast.
So, uh, yeah.
So therefore I'm using scikit learn's PCA to get the same results as what I have written up here.
Okay.
so all of this I already explained here I'm taking PCA, dot explained variance ratio and then I just
multiply it by 100.
So basically this here is proportion.
And then I want percent.
And why do I want it in percent.
Literally no compelling reason.
You could leave this out and then make that 0.99.
As you like this is just personal preference.
And then of course I'm taking the cumulative sum so that I can calculate the component index at which
the cumulative variance explained exceeds 99%.
So that gives me the number of components to keep.
And then I export the training activations which is still in the original dimensional space.
So the MLP expansion space, I haven't yet done the compression.
And then the eigenvectors and the number of components that we want to keep Exercise four is kind of
similar to exercise three, in the sense that the entire goal of this exercise is to write a function
that will perform the GED on the training set, and you can call that function for each layer of the
model.
And also, as with exercise three, most of this code you can copy paste from the previous video where
I demoed GED in LM data for one layer.
So up here you compress the training data down to a smaller dimensionality.
Calculate the covariance matrices of the reduced dimensional data set.
Calculate shrinkage regularization storing those regularized covariance matrices as separate variable
names.
And then here you implement the generalized eigendecomposition.
Now here when you do the GED you can just use the Is the regularized covariance for r.
So the second input into the I th function which is the denominator matrix, or like the reference matrix.
And you can use the unadulterated.
So the non regularized covariance matrix for s.
I've already discussed why you would want to do this in the previous video.
And I'll mention it again briefly when I switch to code.
But that is commonly done.
Again the idea is just to preserve as much of the information in S as possible in the numerator matrix
that you want to isolate the patterns for, and then just regularize the R matrix.
And yeah, as you also know from the previous video, you want to repeat this procedure.
So you do the generalized eigendecomposition twice once for him versus her and once for her versus him.
And then there's one more thing that you should implement in this function, which I mentioned and showed
briefly in the previous demo, although I didn't actually write out the math for you, I just showed
you the code.
So that is that code is here.
The math is here.
So the idea is that we want to see what these patterns actually look like.
Now the pattern is not the same thing as the eigenvector.
The eigenvector is the filter weights like the spatial kernel that we apply to the data.
The pattern you get by multiplying the weights matrix so w.
This is the top eigenvector that you would get here by the covariance matrix.
And that would be one of these covariance matrices here.
Now there's a deeper mathematical discussion about why this is the right thing to do.
And I'm not going to get into the nuances of that here.
But suffice it to say, this reveals the pattern in the data that we can interpret.
Now the covariance matrix is in the reduced dimensional space.
So you also want to expand the covariance matrix by pre-multiplying by the same principal components
eigenvectors that you used for the compression.
So this is kind of like undoing the compression to expand the dimensionality back out to the original
MLP expansion layer space.
And then you can correlate the pattern for him with the pattern for her.
That's what you see over here.
Here I'm using Pearson R.
That will give me a statistic a correlation coefficient value and also the p value.
So when you return this that's going to be interesting to look at over the different layers.
Anyway so you want to output from this function the projected data for him the projected data for her.
So these are the low dimensional projections for the target's projected onto their corresponding eigenvectors.
And you also want to export the eigenvectors themselves, because in the next exercise, we are going
to apply these eigenvectors to the test set data.
And of course this correlation object over here from this analysis.
And then over here we have the top eigenvalue for him and the top eigenvalue for her.
We are going to visualize these data to see if the largest eigenvalue, which is related to the separability
in the model, changes as a function of depth into the model.
Okay.
Now this exercise is actually a little bit tricky, but I hope you find it to be a good educational
experience.
If you get stuck, then feel free to keep watching the video where I will discuss my solution, and
I'll also expand on some of the practical Implementational details of GED.
So this stuff is tricky, but all of this code you have seen before in the previous couple of videos.
Okay.
So here I'm projecting the data down to a lower dimensional space.
Note here I'm post-multiplying the PCA eigenvectors.
So so the training activations times the PCA eigenvectors.
Again, nowhere in here am I actually using the test set.
All of the principal components vectors and the generalized eigendecomposition vectors are only based
on the training set.
Here are their covariance matrices.
You have to be mindful of when you need to transpose and when you don't.
Uh, it really just depends on the orientation of the data.
But the best way to do it is just to pick one of these at random, like transpose or don't transpose.
And then you check the sizes and you want to make sure that the size of this covariance matrix is features
by features and not observations by observations.
Okay.
So that is the covariance matrices.
Here I'm doing the shrinkage regularization.
And then here is the generalized eigendecomposition.
Again nothing new here.
This is all stuff you have seen now in several videos.
So the very first one where I did the very simple demo with the X data set.
And also in the video where I first the video thereafter where I first demoed GED in uh, in LM data.
Okay.
So then we want to project the, uh, targets down onto the top, uh, generalized Eigendecomposition
vector.
And we have to do that twice for the Him analysis and for the her analysis.
And then, uh, so also notice here I'm not projecting down all of the words in the entire sequence,
like what we did in the previous video here.
This is really just about the target words.
We're just focusing on the target words here.
Okay.
And then here is the pattern analysis as I mentioned.
Uh, yeah.
The right thing to do to interpret the patterns in the data themselves is take the eigenvector and multiply
that by the corresponding covariance matrix.
And actually I think I'd prefer not to do this on the regularized matrix but on the original covariance
matrix.
Okay.
And then yeah here pre-multiplying by the PCA eigenvectors.
And then this will get us back to the MLP space.
Now if these neurons actually had some meaningful spatial geometric organization, then this is the
thing that we could visualize and interpret.
For example, when, uh, you know, in my neuroscience lab, when we do these kinds of analyses on
neuroscience data, we can visualize this pattern over the different electrodes that we're recording
from or the different pixels in the image of a brain map here for these models.
You know, the MLP neurons have no meaningful spatial relationship.
There's no reason why.
Neuron 1000 and 1001.
You know, they don't have anything to do with each other.
They just happen to be indexed sequentially.
So therefore we're not going to really visualize these data in any kind of meaningful map sense.
But we are going to correlate them to see how they are, how these patterns are related to each other
in the original MLP data space.
Again, here, in theory, all of this stuff should be real valued.
We shouldn't be getting complex valued results.
But just because of some tiny numerical inaccuracies and little numerical issues.
It is possible for some of these results to be complex valued, and that is why I just extract the real
part here and the real part here.
And, uh, and then I think I actually don't need this here because all of these are already guaranteed
to be real valued.
So, uh, so I don't remember if there is a particular reason why I include that here anyway.
Uh, yeah.
So I'll run this code to generate that function.
And now we are ready for the analyses in the next exercise.
Congrats on getting this far through the code challenge.
I'm now going to break the video to give you an opportunity to get up and stretch your legs and splash
water on your face, and so on.
When you're ready, when you're feeling refreshed, come back to the next video where we will complete
the code challenge.